CHASING SHADOWS ACROSS BORDERS: INDIA-ASEAN AGAINST TRANSNATIONAL CRIMES

 
 Koyel Bal (UG III) and Ritoja Sen (UG II)


DIGITAL SLAVERY: THE EVOLUTION OF SOUTHEAST ASIAN CYBER CRIME

Thousands from south and southeast Asia, specifically India, leave their homes, chasing work in south east Asian countries, unaware of the fact that they are stepping into a deceptive and coercive system of organised crimes, which stretches along borders and thrives online. Many back at home fall victim to these same scam centres, which hold thousands of unemployed people captive in the name of employment. 

These cyber scamming centres did not grow overnight. Since COVID-19 and Myanmar's coup in 2021, the criminal landscape of Southeast Asia has evolved as cybercrime networks, flourishing across the Mekong. Southeast Asia, a hot zone of narcotics production, weapons smuggling, human trafficking and illegal gambling, underwent a rapid transformation after the Covid-19 pandemic and the 2021 Coup of Myanmar, which led to a massive security vacuum in the region. Within five years, a highly resilient cyber scam industry took shape out of Myanmar and spread across the Mekong region, imposing annual losses of up to 37 billion USD in East and Southeast Asia alone. The rapid expansion of cyber scam operations in the South East Asia has led the UN to describe it as one of the fastest growing criminal economies in the world.
High walled, heavily guarded, fortified compounds, operated with impunity, stand tall, alongside the Moei River, between the Thai and Burmese border. Backed by private Chinese investors, these compounds are tucked away from the rest of the world, stay active online, efficiently scamming millions worldwide. Inside, trafficked workers are forced into running planned and sophisticated fraud schemes of various types. These trafficked masses often hail from India, Bangladesh, Thailand, Vietnam and the African subcontinent. According to the UN reports, these operations rely on the trafficking of people who are forced to commit online fraud under threat violence and coercion. Survivors described conditions that included torture, arbitrary detention, debt bondage and servitude that international law explicitly prohibits.

Thousands of Indians set out to search for jobs overseas, end up trapped inside secured scam compounds in Myanmar, Cambodia and Laos. These people are held captive against their will and forced to perform fraudulent activities against strangers online. The UN reports states that most of these people who fall prey to such scams, belong to the unemployed section of the society. These people are often the only earner of their families and are mostly trapped by friends, families, co-workers or acquaintances. 

In a parallel scenario, hundreds of Indians fall prey to digital arrest scams, banking scams and employment scams, targeting particularly the elderly and the vulnerable groups of people using AI technologies, often through social media, resulting in scams of thousands of crores of hard-earned money.
These scams are often performed by trained individuals who impersonate officials and call or video call victims with forged warrants or arrest orders claiming the victim is under investigation for serious crimes. The victims are then forced to transfer an amount of money in order to avoid arrests. According to an April 2025 Niti Aayog report, India is a top target for digital arrest scams.



CHINA'S CONTRADICTORY CRUSADE

The role of China has recently increased in the Burmese matters. China has become more active in deciding what happens in Myanmar to protect its own interests. Recently, Beijing has shown more support for Myanmar's military government, not because it fully trusts its leader but because it wants to prevent the country from collapsing into chaos. China sees the loss of Lashio as a major setback for the Junta and a serious risk to its own border security. To stay influential China has been talking with Myanmar's leaders, helping organise ceasefire discussions in convincing and even supporting plans for elections. However, China is not fully satisfied with the Junta's ability to govern so its main focus now is to stop the military from collapsing all together. At the same time the trafficking of Chinese citizens into scam centres has raised questions about whether the Junta can control crime and protect Chinese interests. 

China became more serious about shutting down cyber scam centres during operation 1027. Some experts believe China may have quietly supported the offensive led by the “Three Brotherhood Alliance” because this group promised to crack down on scam centres near the China Myanmar border. These scam centres had been allowed to operate by local forces which had already caused tensions between China and Myanmar. 

 After the Rebel groups success many scam operations were deserted and moved for the South mainly two areas near the Thailand Myanmar border. This shift has moved the problem away from China's border but it has not stopped Chinese citizens from being traffic into these centres.

Centres continue to grow and more Chinese citizens are affected. Public concern in China has increased and this has pushed the Chinese government to take action working together with Thailand and Myanmar to shut down these illegal operations. China in this scenario plays a dual and contradictory role acting both as part of the problem and part of the solution. China's approach in this matter is selective as it privatizes the stability of Myanmar's Regime over a full-scale dismantling of criminal networks.

China responds when it's a risk on its borders and citizens, not for complete crackdown of the organized criminal syndicates. Such a response on part of the Chinese government shows its eagerness to become more of an influential regional power, keeping its own borders and sovereignty intact, than taking down disruptive coercive criminal networks as a whole.



FROM DIGITAL NODES TO PROXY STATES
Both India and ASEAN member states, as previously discussed, have been under growing threat from Cyber-crime networks which operate at the volatile politically fragile regions of the South-east Asian countries of Myanmar, Laos, Cambodia and Thailand, under the Chinese organized cyber-crime syndicates, targeting technologically skilled youths from India and the Southeast Asian countries as well, thus, non-traditional security threat posed by internal non-state agencies and catalysed by foreign state actors targeting government agencies, critical infrastructure, and research institutions. Hence, the threat is not domestically manageable alone, but requires assertive regional cooperation among the affected zones towards a proactive approach.
At the 21st ASEAN-India Summit of 10th October 2024, held at Vientiane, Lao PDR, two joint statements relating to managing the security concerns, both traditional and non-traditional, were initiated. The statements included the Strategic Partnership of India and the ASEAN member states on the Indo-Pacific relating to the maritime security issues and towards Digital Transformation, effectively building digital public infrastructure and managing the Cyber security concerns that has severely affected the youth from both India as well as ASEAN member states under the organised criminal syndicates and its increasing number of bases in Myanmar, Laos and Cambodia. In this relation, the India-Thailand-ASEAN cooperation becomes quite essential, as Thailand serves as a geographic gateway and bridge builder between India and ASEAN, occupying a central, critical and complex position at the conduction and sustenance of the regional cybercrime landscape because of its not so stringent cross-border enforcement, enabling India to address the industrialised cyber-crime networks effectively at their source, transit corridors, and digital nodes and to ensure proactive roles to take down Cyber-criminal networks.
Between 2022 and 2025, as the Indian Embassy in Bangkok provides, approximately 6998 individuals were rescued from the Cyber-scam compounds across the Southeast Asian region, including 2168 from Myanmar alone. Between 2020 and 2025, the Indian Cyber Crime Coordination Centre (I4C) identified over 1.9 million Mule accounts, blocked, 805 fraudulent apps and 3,266 website links, and helped prevent suspicious transactions worth approx. 245 million USD. However, response is largely reactive focusing on rescue operations than on addressing the structural vulnerabilities that lies in weaker border regulations, unsafe migrating pathways and proliferating deceptive online recruitment networks.  
To counter China’s ambition to become the regional power and get its hold over the Indo-pacific, India has offered the ASEAN member countries technical assistance and intelligent sharing to enhance their level of cybersecurity. For instance, India and Singapore have conducted cyber exercises and India-Indonesia, & India-Malaysia on cyber security training programs respectively. However, the cyber threat intelligence sharing network established by India’s “Act East” Policy hasn’t been regular, thereby, lesser conduct of proactive measures. The youths still face serious financial breakdown from unlicensed payment processors and the infamous ‘pig butchering’ scams of crypto exchanges. Other than that lack of intelligence sharing in terms of critical military and security infrastructure causes lack of maritime domain awareness, thereby, contentious with the ambition to get hold of Indo-Pacific. Greater digitisation programme without such confidence building measures increases the potential risks for cyber slavery and maritime threats, thereby, territorial risks along with youth demography concerns.
Territorial risks further intensify when China’s intervention in peacekeeping and in taking down organised criminal activities by Chinese syndicates in Southeast Asia comes about only in exchange of its own interests. China’s influence becomes a growing threat to India’s emergence as a regional power, its national security and integrity as a whole, since India remains as the target base for the online cyber scamming industries of Southeast Asia, largely supported by Chinese transnational criminal syndicates and its Northeastern Region (NER) lies crucially in a geographic position with a volatile separatist political landscape, that can easily be taken over as a proxy state by China for its strategic influence exerting zone.
 

VISION FORWARD
So far discussed, Act East Policy of India and the ASEAN-India bilateral, trilateral and multilateral cooperation along with the ADMM-Plus meet has not adequately been able to take down the industrialised online gambling networks. There is a need to address the issue through a Victim-centric lens rather than focusing on the perpetrator’s conduct. The IT sector youth population is systemically lured into higher packages in the Southeast Asian countries, and forcefully engaged into labouring for online scammers, leading to the financial crash at individual level and loss of massive IT sector youth potentialities at a broader perspective of human resource capital. The government of the affected countries should take up the prevention, protection and rehabilitation approach in cooperation with the state actors of the operation base states, thereby, call for a cross-border threat management system. Such industrialised networks need to be turned down through a strong institutionalised structured financial tracking, victim identification, digital forensic and cross-border investigation procedures. Digital intelligence sharing mechanism should be regulated institutionally and legalised financial cooperation in terms of cryptocurrency transactions, mule accounts and shell companies should be facilitated between India and the ASEAN member states. Further, the state actors need to engage with the non-state agencies and private sector actors and enforce a regulatory accountability on their part beyond voluntary compliance to state regulations.
ASEAN-India cooperation’s paradigm of policy-centric reactive approach towards effectively addressing the cyber threats through mere dialogue orientation and denouncing foreign actors needs to be shifted towards a more proactive institutionalised mechanism that facilitates regional accountability, strengthening of confidence building measures, stricter border-enforcement and governance regulations for politically volatile border zones, and encourages capacity building and potential recognition to ensure youth do not fall under the trap of scammers.



_____________




REFERENCES:
1.     Strangio Sebastion, “How China has responded to Southeast Asia’s “Scamdemics”, 20th May 2025, The Diplomat - https://thediplomat.com/2025/05/how-china-has-responded-to-southeast-asias-scamdemic/
2.     “The Geopolitics of Southeast Asia’s Cyber-scamming crisis”, IISS- https://www.iiss.org/publications/armed-conflict-survey/2025/armed-conflict-survey-2025/regional-spotlight-asia
3.     Aheibam Christina, “Cyber Diplomacy and India’s Act East Policy: Strengthening Regional Security and Digital Cooperation in the Indo-Pacific”, Journal by CyberSpace
4.     Shirke Abhijeet, “Cyber Security Cooperation: ASEAN and India”, https://www.abhijeetshirke.in/cyber-security-cooperation-asean-and-india/
5.     Verma Anoop, “Defending Digital India: Strategic responses to cross-border state-sponsored cyber offensive”, ET Government, https://government.economictimes.indiatimes.com/news/digital-india/defending-digital-india-strategic-responses-to-cross-border-state-sponsored-cyber-offensives/120320172
6.     “A matter of survival: The human cost of cyber scam operations in South-East Asia”, United Nations Human Rights Commission, 20th February 2026, https://www.ohchr.org/en/stories/2026/02/matter-survival-human-cost-cyber-scam-operations-south-east-asia
7. Areena Arora, Arundathi Rajan and Srinivasan Ramani, “Forced to fraud- Inside cyber-scam factories trapping Indians in Southeast Asia”, The Hindu, February 22, 2026, https://www.thehindu.com/infographics/2026-02-22/digital-arrest-india-cyber-scams-south-east-asia/index.html
8. “Cyber Scam Centers: A Growing Flashpoint in China-Myanmar Relations”, Stinson, 7th April 2025, https://www.stimson.org/2025/cyber-scam-centers-a-growing-flashpoint-in-china-myanmar-relations/
9.   Rami Niranjan Desai, “China shut down cyber scam centres on its borders. For India, the pressure will only grow”, 13th October 2025, https://theprint.in/opinion/china-myanmar-cyber-scam-centres-indian-youth/2762771/








