Whenever a crisis is born in society, be it economic, political, or say climate-change related, it is always the women who bear the brunt of the man’s frustration and anger. In the face of the global environmental crisis, how is eco-feminism uplifting and redefining traditional notions of environmentalism in the context of gender and social justice in India? How can the principles of eco-feminism be integrated into existing climate adaptation strategies to enhance their effectiveness?

In her seminal book, “The Death of Nature” (1980), Carolyn Merchant argues that the torturing and witch-burning practices in the 15th-18th century Europe was a powerful metaphor for an emerging philosophy of science in which nature was seen as an essentially feminine domain of disorder that had to be conquered, subjugated, not to mention, tortured, in order to extract her secrets and keep her contracted, constrained. Now, before we go into the context and rationale behind Carolyn’s rhetoric, one thing is clearly projected out of her statement, that Nature and Women have been having a common bond dating back to centuries, over the elements of suppression, oppression and domination. The mechanistic ways the Western world has produced, reproduced, and conceptualized its past relations with nature, especially during the time period of their imperialist conquests, has its deeply embedded impact on the conceptualization of Nature in the other parts of the world as well (with few exceptions), who have endured their colonial endeavours, and India, as a post-colonial country sadly does not count in the list of exceptions.

The twentieth century was the beginning of a new era where certain thinkers highlighted the obvious interconnectedness of social and environmental issues, particularly in the context of women’s lives and thus emerged Eco-Feminism as a distinctive arena of Women's Studies, where the common grounds of Nature and Women was discoursed on and about, which eventually came to be brilliantly taking shape as a powerful movement, in the real world. With the post-World War period witnessing the global rise of socialism, egalitarianism, as well as, environmental concerns, the concepts of both social justice and climate-related policy formulation, came to influence a larger portion of the world simultaneously and at the intersection of these two constructs, the concept of climate justice emerged, which too emerged as a movement throughout the years. However, post-colonial India’s approach and the structures that address the twin engines of eco-feminism and climate justice, central to the vision of an eco-inclusive, progressive India, are the subject of much debate, discussion, and deliberation.

Eco-feminism as a term finds its global origin in eminent feminist Françoise d'Eaubonne’s writing, who coined the term ecofeminism to portray the influence of women and their ability to generate an ecological revolution in her 1974 book Le Feminisme ou la Mort.Eco-feminism emerged largely as a strong movement in the 1970s. However, to actually delve into the discussion of the emergence and evolution of eco-feminism, and its ideological roots, the knowledge of the socio-historical context much prior to it , becomes imperative. The mechanistic scientific discourses, pioneered by Sir Francis Bacon, Descartes, Mandeville, Boyle and others, emerging around the 16th century, asserted the inertness of nature. Such theories further asserted the ‘better civilized’ Christian Europeans a ‘God-given’ right to justify wars as called ‘liberal interventionism’ and ideologically sanctioned the rampant expropriation of natural resources as well as extermination of the voiceless unarmed indigenous people of various ecospheres. These processes of violence became necessary a new economy from a ‘desacralized, inanimate Earth’. The understanding that the Earth was no longer considered a lively entity, had validated the terrible consequences like The Great Dying of America and the witch-burnings in Europe and here lies the social context behind Merchant’s statement as mentioned before. Ecofeminists like Maria Mies (1986) hence rightly argue that the developed countries have been built on the backs of nature, women, and the colonies, by the white, male-dominated population of the developed world.

It is in this context that lies the deepest crux of the ideology of Eco-feminism, as a contrasting, transformative philosophy. Eco-feminism offers a choice, an alternative way of life that situates itself within the organic whole and finds its fulfillment through a material and spiritual union with Nature (Pandey). Eco-feminism combines the concerns of the urgent considerations of planetary survival and well-being with the ethics of caring, nurturing and symbiotism. The core of Eco-feminist ethics is to overcome the dualism of self/other, that in turn reflects the dualism of reason/nature, where self and reason always win over other and nature respectively, from the dominant perspective. Eco-feminists like Plumwood (2002), opine that the concept of an interconnectedness of the other with the self, but also as a separate being in their own right, gives birth to a condition of freedom and identity for both others and the self.

The combined effects of industrialization, capitalism, scientific exploration of nature, and the ascendancy of the domination metaphor over that of a nurturing Mother Earth, according to eco-feminists like Merchant, can still be felt in social and political thought, as much as it was evident in the art, philosophy, and science of the seventeenth century, which refers to the fact that the same patriarchal structures that exploit and marginalize women, also exploit and degenerate the environment. Eco-feminist ethics aims to overthrow such structures through the principles of empathy, support and care instead of the desire for power, a sense of belonging instead of the concept of possession and ownership, and sustainability instead of degradation. It is here that eco feminism opens the doors for the discussion of the need for climate justice in resisting power structures and advocating for the challenged, underprivileged masses.

Eco-feminism, as a discourse in a post-colonial country like India, does not achieve any meaningfulness, if it is dominated by just the narrative of the middle or upper middle class women, because, it is a discourse promoting equality and it is fruitless to argue about equality if the discourse does not accommodate the struggles of the most unequal sections of the society, that is the indigenous Adivasi women, and the underprivileged sections who rely on lands, rivers, forests and other natural resources for significantly a large portion of their subsistence and livelihood. As Ramchandra Guha puts it, Indian environmental movements are mainly led by people who are intimately connected with the specificities of the landscape, which he termed “livelihood environmentalism”, and as observed women, being often the most closely connected with the land, form a significant portion of leadership in these movements.

- Sufferings of marginalised women in disaster hit areas: Women make up roughly 43% of India’s agricultural labour force, concentrating climate risk in a heavily gendered sector and increasing women’s exposure to climate impacts and livelihood insecurity. India is the second worst flood-affected country in the world after Bangladesh, with 40 million hectares of its land prone to flooding. These floods amplify existing gender disparities in water, sanitation, and hygiene (WASH) access, the worst sufferers of whom are obviously the women. According to a recent data, approximately 43 percent of the 28 state climate action plans neglect gender-specific WASH considerations, and during the times of disasters, the WASH considerations of women become narrowly dismissed. The women from West Bengal’s Sundarbans, which is the cyclone capital of India, Odisha, Assam, drought-prone Bundelkhand, Bihar are the frequent sufferers.

- Connection of climate change and the rise of domestic violence: As per a JAMA Psychiatry study, a 1°C average temperature rise in India, Nepal, and Pakistan links to a 6.3 percent increase in intimate partner violence, amongst these, India with maximum accretion in domestic violence stole the first spot reporting the highest number of cases. While seemingly unrelated, climate change and domestic violence manifest as intertwined threads of global crises, environmental disasters strain resources, deepening roots of domestic violence. Findings from the International Panel on Climate Change’s climate crisis report first flagged the emergence of violence against women stemming directly from water scarcity and failing agriculture as temperatures rise. Climate induced crises often cause tremendous economic stress in low-income families. For instance, men who cannot migrate to other states due to such obstructions often target their women at home to vent out their frustration through abuse.

- Reconstruction of narrative through localised approach: In India, a localised approach combining eco-feminism and climate justice has been adapted as the rural and Indigenous women are working confidently as frontline leaders who link biodiversity, food sovereignty, and community resilience to broader demands for gender‑responsive climate policy, with networks like Navdanya, Deccan Development Society, Swayam Shikshan Prayog, Vanastree, and SEWA translating ecological knowledge into seed sovereignty, agroecology, water conservation, and livelihood resilience.Research and advocacy platforms such as IMPRI and Kalpavriksh amplify these grassroots practices into policy discourse while feminist scholars and frameworks, feminist political ecology, intersectionality, and the work of scholars like Vandana Shiva and various research scholars, provide analytical tools to map how caste, class, and gender shape climate vulnerability and adaptive capacity. The women of the drought-prone region of Bundelkhand have sought to build kitchen gardening of drought resilient crops, water shed management training -”Jal Saheli” to tackle their issues. In Andhra Pradesh, women farmers were among the pioneering users of climate-resilient agriculture, like zero-budget natural farming, that reduced reliance on chemical inputs, increased soil fertility, However, effectiveness of community‑led conservation is regionally varied and the structural barriers these movements face in providing justice to all , include neoliberal conservation models, weak recognition in formal climate planning, and limited access to finance and land rights. This leads them to make calls for reparative justice and gendered National Adaptation Plans. The G20 New Delhi Leaders' Declaration 2023 emphasized gender-inclusive climate action and women's empowerment through participation in decision-making, education, health, and bridging the digital divide. Although the government has made notable efforts in climate action, the policy frameworks largely lack a sufficient gender focus and provisions for the marginalized women.

- Legal and Institutional Strengthening: Laws and policies on climate justice must be accessible, and transparent, providing opportunities for each and every citizen, regardless of gender and background, to engage and seek redress for environmental harm. To legally strengthen the framework in this context, several key steps are suggestive. Firstly, the National Green Tribunal (NGT) should be empowered by expanding its jurisdiction to include climate-specific cases and most importantly, establishing a dedicated climate justice panel with representation from indigenous and vulnerable groups, including a special panel for women from those groups. Ecofeminist principles must be embedded into the National Action Plan on Climate Change (NAPCC) and state-level climate strategies. Formal recognition of climate justice as a constitutional right under Article 21 (Right to Life) would ensure state accountability for environmental harm and climate inaction and women from different concerned sectors would certainly benefit from that.

Gender-sensitive disaster -planning must be approached with promptness. Enhancement of menstrual hygiene facilities especially during the time of emergencies, ensuring the continuous availability of clean water, establishing gender-segregated, flood-resilient sanitation facilities and provisions for post-disaster livelihood building skills are key recommendations to include in disaster management processes.

Incorporating indigenous knowledge and traditional ecological practices through legal instruments like the Forest Rights Act, Panchayati Raj Act, that can protect women’s resource rights. This in turn promotes community-development, which women, as seen in instances, engage in actively.

Gender-sensitive legal reforms are the most crucial, focusing on laws that address the gendered impacts of climate change, codify the gendered climate impacts. Mandating the Gender Representation like securing women’s inclusion in climate governance bodies, tribunals, and planning commissions will promote equality in the decision making.

Expanding public participation in environmental decision-making, enhancing climate literacy through green learning agendas, skill-building and encouraging public interest litigation, like climate litigations, and forming monetary or non-monetary partnerships. Allocation of dedicated budgets for gender-inclusive climate action, indigenous conservation, law implementation and community service is of utmost importance.

Decision of any energy transition initiative, must be taken by analysing the impact of it, especially on the vulnerable groups, and urban women, who derive their livelihood by working in these sectors. In urban regions, women belonging to informal settlements, urban women workers, waste pickers, require to be having much more protection regarding their health, and their working conditions. Also, water stress, becomes a huge issue in urban areas owing to municipal mismanagement and creating insecurity and conflict, which needs to be addressed with proper municipal allocation in accordance with the water table.

Providing targeted support to women by offering training, financial and resource-led assistance to them will help millions of poor women to participate in the structure of building a green nation.

Finally, integrating climate justice and the women’s perspectives from concerned sectors into national and state policies with adequate funding and cross-sectoral cooperation, redefines narratives and is essential for a just inclusive green nation. However, before aspiring for these steps, it is of utmost necessity that proper research and analysis committees are set up to first, know the actual issues, because as mentioned before, women’s concerns regarding the environment in India are not properly addressed by the intellectual studies. Before taking any action, the government has to delve deep into the data which should be forthright, direct and uncompromising, and if possible, even be made public.

However, taking climate-inclusive steps produce some cons of its own too. Often, local governance (panchayats), state bureaucracy, party politics, and corporate interests interfere, shape outcomes and create barriers to implementation. Often conflicts regarding resources, or well intentional interventions producing harms, like in green grabbing, create havoc.

Way forward:

As Amitav Ghosh writes, capitalism is not the only culprit in the further marginalisation of the marginalised in the grip of climate crisis, but empire and imperialism are equally responsible. The extent to which the women from post-colonial South-Asian nations suffer from climate disasters, is impossible to cope up with, unless the now “developed “countries take historical accountability and extend their hands of support, through strategic partnerships, technology transfers, and financial cooperation. By providing access to clean energy innovations, climate-resilient infrastructure, and sustainable agricultural practices tailored to local ecosystems and international climate finance mechanisms, such as the Green Climate Fund, can help India invest in mitigation and adaptation projects that prioritize the vulnerable communities. Moreover, neo-liberal conservation models, collaborative research and capacity-building programs highlighting the principles of eco-feminism can empower Indian institutions to better monitor environmental risks and implement equitable climate policies. The spirits of global solidarity and shared responsibility can help India deal with climate justice through the spirits of eco-feminism more effectively.

The concept of climate justice is ever-evolving, shaped by the complexities of the changing world. Rather than seeking a fixed definition, the eco-feminists of India through activism, research and governance are working towards embracing the dynamic nature of climate justice, learning from the past and incorporating diverse perspectives and voices. The securement of the future of climate justice is being fought and the collective efforts as imbibed in the ethos of eco-feminism will continue to resist, reflect, and will ultimately determine the course of our country’s progress in our planet’s history.

## BIBLIOGRAPHY

"UNICEF. "What is Climate Justice and What Can We Do to Achieve It?" Accessed on 16.10.25

https://www.bing.com/ck/a?!&&p=de9151d41f21be45c46c2b8260e54941a98ec9269c9d8c2b93d55364c61f9c1aJmltdHM9MTc2MDY1OTIwMA&ptn=3&ver=2&hsh=4&fclid=0575eac9-813a-6a0e-007b-f8d7809c6b45&psq=climate+justice&u=a1aHR0cHM6Ly93d3cudW5pY2VmLm9yZy9pbm5vY2VudGkvc3Rvcmllcy93aGF0LWNsaW1hdGUtanVzdGljZS1hbmQtd2hhdC1jYW4td2UtZG8tYWNoaWV2ZS1pdA

Lam, Curtis. “Explainer: What Is Climate Justice and Why Is It Important?” Earth.Org. Last modified 2022. https://earth.org/what-is-climate-justice/.

Kumar, Sunaina. “Women and Climate Action.” Observer Research Foundation. Originally published in Business Today, July 2, 2025. https://www.orfonline.org/research/women-and-climate-action.

Khullar, Akanksha. “The Disproportionate Impact of Climate Change on Women.” Observer Research Foundation, May 1, 2023. https://www.orfonline.org/expert-speak/the-disproportionate-impact-of-climate-change-on-women.

Ghosh, Amitav. Nutmeg's Curse: Parables for a Planet in Crisis. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2021.

Ghosh, Amitav. The Great Derangement: Climate Change and the Unthinkable. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2016.

Prasad, Bablu. “10 Major Environmental Movements of India.” Interdisciplinary Science and Public Health, February 9, 2024. https://sciph.info/10-major-environmental-movements-of-india/.

United Nations Environment Programme. “Andhra Pradesh to Become India’s First Zero Budget Natural Farming State.” UNEP, June 3, 2022. https://www.unep.org/news-and-stories/press-release/andhra-pradesh-become-indias-first-zero-budget-natural-farming-state.

PreventionWeb. “Envisioning Resilience: Bringing Underrepresented Women’s Voices into Planning for Climate Change.” PreventionWeb, September 26, 2023. https://www.preventionweb.net/news/envisioning-resilience-bringing-underrepresented-womens-voices-planning-climate-change.

Feminism in India. “Climate Crisis and the Violence Against Women.” Feminism in India, March 12, 2024. https://feminisminindia.com/2024/03/12/climate-crisis-and-the-violence-against-women/.

CNN. “Why Women Are the Secret Weapon in the Fight Against Climate Change.” CNN, March 6, 2014. https://edition.cnn.com/2014/03/06/world/why-women-are-the-secret/index.html.

.
