Diplomacy does not always mean an activity connected with government and international sphere. Bollywood movies also played a vital role for the cultural diplomacy of India and work as a soft-power weapon. India’s identity is deeply rooted with its culture from very ancient time. Bollywood industry as a predominant platform of its cultural overview tends to influence global politics and diplomacy. Recent delegation from Indonesia for ‘kuch kuch hota hain’, award winning film ‘RRR’ from previous Raj Kapoor’s ‘Awaara’s admiration from J.V.Stalin and Mao Zedong are also examples of soft-power diplomacy. This paper tends to search the changing pattern of Bollywood films from Nehruvian India to present digital India. Primary objective of this article is to find out the interlink of Bollywood movies and global dimension. How does it influence of silver screen to change their plot from socialist period ‘Awaara’ to neoliberal period movies of Indian film industry. Contemporary foreign atmosphere is always parallel for keeping the influence in cultural diplomacy. Indian cultural diplomacy experts invite global audience to experience its diverse tradition. ‘Bulbbul’ the webseries released in Netflix on 24th June, 2020. The director was Anvita Dutt. She is already well-known in cine-industries as a dialogue writer and lyricist. At least for one and half decade she is surviving in Bollywood and for last seven years, she took up her pen for some movies those are based on urban plot, generally popular and became cult. The campaign over ‘Bulbbul’ was a ‘movie o fear’. But later it became clear that the concept of fear is not paranormal, but about solitude, domestic violence and neuro-phobia, according to social discrimination. Presence of supernaturalism is also present there. Goddess Kali gives a new life to the tortured bride of Zamindar family, but the point of possession has came here due to the associative part of feminism. It was firmly built as a progressive movie, but the several use of red filter, flaws in the timeline and dullness of Anvita’s direction made the platform for criticisers. Firstly, one thing should be cleared, it is not a traditional film review. This paper tends to bring some theory, social philosophy and history because after some years of release, any movie can go through ‘theoretical purification’. Because it helps to understand the plot properly. Generally, as a popular Indian film, I shall try here to point out the timeline-debate of ‘Bulbbul’ and its (a) political presence. I have consciously used the bracket and I think, I can explain it in proper time. Social media and urban criticism now mainly criticised about the timeline of ‘Bulbbul’. It has completely failed in historicity. The characters are too modern to live in the last phase of 19th century. Design of men’s coat and outfit, high-profile saree and blouse, small use of vail or ‘parda’ system, fitton car in the village road, fireplace and some songs those were absolutely not written on that time. All the entire creation of ‘Bulbbul’ - is it a time over tradition of Bollywood industry? If mainstream Bollywood movies used to go towards realism, it will shift its dimension to an imaginary world. But its demand will be realistic. As we saw in the beginning of ‘Bulbbul’ the screen showed ‘Bengal presidency’, as in the beginning of ‘Lagan’ voiceover claimed ‘India in 1892’. But its obedience is to a mixed time and cultural dimension. Why that? Because popular Bollywood movie has took the duty to be the main speaker of very difficult Indian politics. But it also needs to produce the entertainment of politics. Indian politics and demand for its entertainment used to be changed in per decades, along with it, its popular policy, public support and subsection used to be changed. This tradition was followed by Bollywood in an absurd cultural rule from 1950s. It is not the following pattern of mainstream politics, but sometimes Hindi movie is parallel with Indian politics. As we saw the release of ‘Diwar’ in just around a few months of emergency period in January, 1975 and ‘Sholay’ in August. Both movies are immensely anti-institutional and supporter of vigilantism. One side the demolition of dacoits and on other side the voice of contemporary mass-dissatisfaction. The character of Gabber Singh, is apparently apolitical, but is he not the representation of state-violence of 70s and therefore? Victory of socially – abolished vigilant is not the reflection of coalition government after two years? Also, after some years of emergency, when the situation was somehow stable, Amitabh used to appear as an urban-bourgeoisie poet, with soft presence (kabhi kabhi 1976) politics – entertainment, reality-imagination ---this all-opposite trajectory made the presence of popular movie in one side imaginary tales and other side the on harsh reality. In result, it is walking like the absurd giraffe in the painting of Salvador Dali. It is result of being consciously (a) political. One thing should be understood carefully. Bollywood movies are equally much political and deeply self-depth having. It is itself the speaker of Indian people’s thought, along with this hoist the flag of an imaginary world where connection with reality exists. In the other words, it is an absurd compilation of realism and escapism. The exact answer of its still not found. But we can say that the revolutionary claim of ‘Bulbbul’ is the same path follower as its predecessor movies. It is not completely realistic feminism based and also used the metaphor of absurdism, horror and paranormal revenge. The concept of equality here was monolithic, that female – body is in the outer perspective of broader political sphere. There is no way out to overcome without paranormal help and at the end of the movie the drastic division of good can’t be always appreciated. This forever hybrid position of Bollywood movie can be called revolutionary? The miracle power to make balance can named as radical? If your answer is ‘yes’, most of the audience will raise their hand in your support. And the rest of the people? Who will listen to them?
